The Joe Rogan experience.
One of the things that happened to me, um,
as a result of like traveling all over the world is that I met this
schizophrenia researcher. Um, his name is Paul Fletcher,
he's at Cambridge. Um,
and he wanted to experience like schizophrenia.
He's treating these people and he wanted to really know because of this
critique that you just laid out. And, um,
he's the only person who I know in that area. Who's done this, you know? So he,
he did like ketamine to try and reproduce the experience because he heard
that that was like reproducing the would reproduce the experience.
Of course it doesn't. Uh,
but this is what people have said are animal models use ketamine
for that reason, but it doesn't. Um,
but he was curious enough to try to figure out what
schizophrenia people who are diagnosed with schizophrenia.
He tried to figure out what they were experiencing.
Um, I don't know if he figured that out, uh,
from this sort of experiential perspective,
but what I do know is that if I ever had a relative who had
schizophrenia, I would send them to Paul Fletcher, um,
because his perspective on it, uh, I,
it really respects the person who's has this diagnoses
and, uh,
it offers them the greatest amount of hope that I have seen
in that area.
And it would be good if other scientists in these
areas, drugs, whatever it is,
what also seek to try to figure out the experience that their paper,
their patients are going through. Yeah.
It'd be almost like learning martial arts without ever sparring. Yeah.
Yeah. Or coaching basketball without.
Yeah. Under pressure. Do you, is there anything that mimics schizophrenia that,
that, that someone, is there a,
like a commonly thought of substance that mimics schizophrenia?
Um, they have suggested large doses of
amphetamines over periods of time with sleep
deprivation can member paranoid schizophrenia,
but I don't know if it really does. I mean, all of this stuff, uh,
I am now questioning, so I, I don't know. I mean, at one time,
if you would ask me that question, maybe five years ago,
I would have said amphetamines, but I don't know. Now.
It's a pretty, he's an odd one to right.
Cause doesn't it affect somewhere in the neighborhood of 1% of the population.
A lot of people it's a lot of people. Um, uh,
but I have a lot more hope about schizophrenia at the having met
Paul Fletcher, just in terms of, um, uh,
I don't want to bastardize his sort of model of thinking about it.
And so I may not have all the details. Right. But I'll just say,
just simply try and explain them, like you and I, we go through the world,
everybody, we have these theories about how the world work. So like, um,
like you smile, I have a theory about what that means,
right? And so, uh, oh, Joe likes me or he's happy today,
whatever. And then I'm right, because you tell me that whatever,
somebody who's diagnosed with schizophrenia,
they also have these models that they're testing out.
And so their model might be like a use when you smile.
They think that you're angry or whatever, uh, and you're plotting against them.
Yes. And their model is just wrong. I mean, it's just like,
they're just getting, they just have, uh, they're bumping,
bumping up against, uh, these wrong answers. And then when they get,
they get more wrong answers, it's even,
it causes even more stress and that's very anxiety provoking.
And then all of that is playing into this. It's like, first of all,
your models are off and now you're just getting this increased anxiety.
And so I think that's how his model sees it. So that,
that means that it's okay.
As long as we let people understand that don't worry if
your model is getting it wrong. Um,
it doesn't mean that that something's wrong with you. It could be, um,
maybe we are good, we have it wrong in our society.
And you have, you might have a better way of thinking about this. So it's like,
as opposed to it being one way that might be multiple ways of thinking about
these, these solving, these problems that humans solve throughout their day.
Uh, then that's how, uh, I think that's how he thinks of it.
Um, and it's, uh, it's a, it's a model of hope for me because,
um,
you lessen the anxiety among the patients and many
of the much of the problems deals,
what does anxiety of people telling them that they're incompetent and you know
how that is, how that feels. That's an adult,
somebody telling you that you're incompetent. It's like,
how can you tell me I'm co.
I mean, competent.
So it exacerbates whatever problems initially have it makes them far worse.
Exactly. Yeah. There's also a thing that seems to have,
I've only know a few people that are schizophrenia,
but it's a disturbing thing when they think that everybody's against them and
they feel like they're on their own,
but by virtue of everyone being against them, they feel, they feel isolated.
Yes. And then there, whatever paranoia they have,
it's like throwing dry sticks on it,
just rages into a fire and it gets even worse.
Cause they think that people are plotting against them and everyone's against
them and they don't have anybody comforting them. Yes. And we need,
we all need that. Absolutely. You know,
and I think particularly people with like a slippery version of reality
probably need that more than most. Yeah.
When you say reality,
it might be multiple realities and that's the thing that we need people to
understand or that it's like it's okay. Um, uh,
it might be, your reality just might be different from theirs,
but not to the point where you have a different reality and that you're allowed
to abuse people. Not.
So I want to be clear cause I know there are some people out here saying
something about alternative facts, not,
I don't mean it like where you manipulate people. I mean, it,
for people who are struggling, uh, like these people with schizophrenia,
um, just to help lessen their anxiety.
Yeah. So with, in terms of marijuana, particularly like high doses of marijuana,
um,
particularly edible marijuana could really seriously exacerbate someone who has
it. Who's kind of hanging on barely anyway. And then boom, you eat an edible.
Absolutely. You're.
So someone like Alex would say that person's schizophrenia was brought on by
marijuana. Whereas I think you and I would probably agree.
They were more likely inclined towards schizophrenia anyway.
And the high dose of marijuana pushed them over there. And then, you know,
every.
All the evidence says what you just said. I mean,
so when you look at the evidence where people have done all of these studies,
um, folks who didn't have these predispositions, um,
the marijuana didn't, uh,
doesn't cause people to be schizophrenia or have a psychotic disorder.
Um, but it certainly can precipitate, um,
or exacerbate, um, um, um,
psychosis in people who are pre-exposed pre predisposed.
So what I was going to get to was,
do you think that maybe for people that have this
predisposition towards schizophrenia,
they should probably avoid psychoactive substances were avoid
something that radically perturbs their version of reality.
They probably should avoid cannabis. Right. Um,
I don't want to say avoid everything because, um,
um.
Is there anything.
I mean, so like.
Could maybe use that maybe would.
Help them. Yeah.
So I spent a little time working in an heroine clinic in Geneva
and so they give out heroin to these patients twice a day. How do they,
every day intravenous or oral, however the patient wants it. Uh,
but a lot of intravenous heroin users. Um, and it's all, you know,
sanitize setting,
hospital setting or clinic setting twice a day.
Many of these people, um,
have psychotic disorders like diagnosed with
schizophrenia and heroin helps me.
Yeah. When many of these symptoms and they feel better, um,
even more so in some cases than anti-psychotic uh,
yeah. I talk about this in the new book, in fact, but yeah, this is, uh,
so I don't want to have this blanket statement that they should avoid
psychoactive substances because some might actually be helpful.
Um, and um, some other people have tried other drugs.
Um, one, uh, psychiatrist in the Netherlands, uh,
gave his patients in fettuccine and he swears that it works.
Um, but that has to be, um, well researched out, but,
uh, we'll see, but I, I know cannabis for sure. Uh, I wouldn't do that.
You wouldn't do cannabis and perhaps maybe not high levels of amphetamines as
well, either because.
I don't know, I will, I would have to, um, um,
slowly titrate and see whether or not it worked or whether or not people feel
better.
Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog J R E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data costs. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan.